
--- PAGE 1 ---
Survey Report
A survey report can be considered one of the most important parts of a CSD. It can provide the
thoughts and assessments of the surveyor conducting the work. Good reporting gives future users of
the CSD a better insight into the what, how, and why for any determinations that were reached.
Did you know surveyors have been generating survey reports since 1879? However, these early
reports were often very brief and pre 1920, they are particularly scarce. Survey reports were not
supplied for every plan as they were not compulsory until the commencement of the 1972 Survey
Regulations, 9(4).
Today survey reports are required by rule, with additional pre-validation requirements found in the
Standard for lodgement of cadastral survey datasets.
One of the most useful sections is the reporting on definition. Rule 8.2(a)(ix) requires the reasons
for, and details of decisions made regarding each existing boundary defined by survey, and the
information considered in order to reach those decisions. Just stating that all boundaries were
defined by survey is insufficient. It gives no insight to future users.
Below are listed some resources to help with documenting useful information in a survey report.
There are two very useful articles in the KnowledgeBase:
KB 763 - Survey Report
KB 855 - Tips for compliance with Rule 8.2
The survey report templates, both the Word/PDF document and the Automated Survey Report
template, include guidance on completing the questions and comments in a useful way. A review of
copies with the included notes, including a read of the ‘hover over’ comments in the Automated
Survey Report, can help refresh our knowledge.
Survey Report template:
Figure 1: Example of the notes found in the Word/PDF template

--- PAGE 2 ---
Figure 2: Example of the notes found in items 1 and 2 of the report template
Figure 3: Screen shot showing a guidance note provided when hovering over the item in the
Automated Survey Report
Also see Rule 8.2 and Lodgement Standard 7.
Rules for Cadastral Survey 2010 – 8.2 Survey Report
Standard for lodgement of cadastral survey datasets - LINZS70000
The Survey Report helps convey insight into the surveyors thinking and considerations at the time of
survey. It gives future users an outline of items considered, assessments made and a record of
decisions reached. A conscientious report is considered good survey practice and will be very useful
in the future.
Prepared by Cadastral Surveyors Group, Property Rights, LINZ