
--- PAGE 1 ---
Your APC pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying

--- PAGE 2 ---
Your pathway guide to Geomatics Surveying
Contents
Introduction 4
Pathway requirements 7
Geomatics APC 7
Competency guidance 8
Big Data (T099) 9
Building information modelling (BIM) management (T087) 11
Cadastre and land management (T007) 12
Conflict avoidance, management and dispute resolution procedures (M006) 13
Construction technology and environmental services (T013) 15
Consultancy services (T014) 16
Data Management 17
Development/project briefs (T024) 18
Engineering surveying (T027) 19
Environmental assessment (T028) 20
Geodesy (T035) 21
GIS (T036) 22
Ground engineering and subsidence (T037) 24
Hydrographic (marine) surveying (T042) 25
Legal/regulatory compliance (T051) 26
Management of the natural environment and landscape (T055) 27
Measurement (T057) 28
Planning development and management (T061) 29
Remote sensing and photogrammetry (T075) 31
Surveying and mapping (T078) 32
Surveying land and sea (T081) 33
Use of the marine environment (T082) 34
3

--- PAGE 3 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Introduction
About the APC How to use this guide
The RICS/SCSI Assessment of Professional Competence (APC) This guide is designed to help you understand more about
ensures that those applying for RICS/SCSI membership are qualifying as an RICS/SCSI member in geomatics. The guide
competent to practise and meet the high standards of is based on Irish market practice and may be unsuitable for
professionalism required by RICS/SCSI. There is a wide range candidates based in other countries. The material is set out in
of pathways available to qualify as an RICS/SCSI member three sections.
covering 19 different areas of practice, at APC (Chartered).
Section one- provides information on this area of practice with
The APC normally consists of: a general overview of the geomatics pathways.
• a period of structured training Section two- lists the competency requirements of the
• a final assessment. geomatics APC
The structured training is based on candidates achieving a Section three- describes the main technical competencies
set of requirements or competencies. These are a mix of associated with geomatics, providing expanded sector
technical, professional, interpersonal, business and specific guidance on each of them. This forms the main
management skills. part of the guide.
4

--- PAGE 4 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
About the competencies Choosing your competencies
The APC aims to assess that you are competent to carry out It is important that you give careful thought to your choice
the work of a qualified chartered surveyor. To be competent and combination of competencies. Your choice will inevitably
is to have the skill or ability to perform a task or function. reflect the work you do in your day-to-day environment
The RICS/SCSI competencies are not just a list of tasks or (driven by the needs of your clients/employer). Your choice
functions, they are also based upon attitudes and and combination of competencies will be a reflection of your
behaviours. The competencies have been drawn up in a judgement. At final assessment, the assessors will take these
generic way so that they can be applied to different areas choices into account. They will expect you to present a
of practice and geographical locations. This guide is sensible and realistic choice that reflects the skills needed to
designed to help you interpret these competencies within fulfil the role of a surveyor in your field of practice.
the context of geomatics.
This guide should help candidates and employers with a
The competencies are defined at three levels of attainment degree of assistance in choosing the competencies that are
and each APC pathway has its own specific combination of most appropriate to their area of practice.
competencies that you must achieve at the appropriate level.
You must reach the required level in a logical progression
How to find help
and in successive stages:
Level 1– knowledge and understanding SCSI Education and Membership will be able to help you
Level 2– application of knowledge and understanding with any general APC queries:
Level 3–reasoned advice and depth of technical knowledge. T 01 6445500
F 01 6611797
The competencies are in three distinct categories: education@scsi.ie
www.scsi.ie
Mandatory competencies– the personal, interpersonal,
professional practice and business competencies common to
all pathways and compulsory for all candidates. These are
explained in more detail in the Requirements and
Competencies guide.
Core competencies– the primary competencies of your
chosen APC pathway.
Optional competencies – a set of competencies selected
by the candidate from a list defined for the particular pathway.
In most cases there is an element of choice. These are mostly
technical competencies, but certain mandatory competencies
also appear on the optional competency list and candidates
are permitted to select oneof these at a higher level.
This guide only deals with the principal core and optional
competencies associated with this area. It does not cover
the mandatory competencies.
5

--- PAGE 5 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
About geomatics
Geomatics is the science and study of spatially related information focusing on the collection, interpretation/analysis
and presentation of the natural, built, social and economic environments. As the underpinning information provider
of the land and property life cycle, geomatics is of fundamental importance to society. A recent study found between
£79 and £136 billion of Gross Value Added in the UK economy was dependent on the products and services of the
Ordnance Survey, the UK national mapping agency.
Geomatics is one of the fastest expanding global markets and a truly worldwide profession. A recent (2004 Frost &
Sullivan) economic study found that the EU GIS market is worth over 1.5 billion euro; the global hydrographic survey
market is in excess of 1.3 billion euro and the Survey Association (a trade body representing professional survey
companies in the UK) estimates that its 80 members generated a total turnover of 140 million euro in 2003-04.
Driven by technology and maintaining its role in land law and other socio-economic areas, leading chartered
surveying firms realise the importance of geomatics, not only to the profession but to the future success of their
businesses. Particularly in the day-to-day integration of geomatics with traditional forms of real estate management,
land administration and construction.
There is huge demand and are major opportunities for chartered land, hydrographic and engineering surveyors.
This is due to a high media profile, coupled with the changing nature of mapping and spatial data management
worldwide. This includes rapid advancements in Information Technology eg GIS, Global Navigation Satellite
Systems, ‘joined up government’ initiatives, digital cadastres and many more. The growth in EU and national
governments’ spatial data agendas and legislation needs chartered surveyors to fill senior management and
advisor roles, offering highly specialist expertise and knowledge.
Geomatics APC • Photogrammetry and remote sensing
• Spatial and metadata management, interpretation
The Geomatics APC is targeted at graduate level practitioners and manipulation
from both accredited courses and through the senior • Land, coastal and marine information management
professional and other routes cognate and non-cognate • Ocean bed and resource surveys
graduates. • Monitoring of structures
• Project management
This APC would also suit anyone with a good aptitude for • Research and consultancy.
science, technology, geography, internationalism,
mathematics and much more. The faculty counts under its
auspices the following areas, all of which a chartered Chartered alternative designations
land/hydrographic/engineering surveyor could potentially related to this pathway
work within.
Candidates who successfully complete this pathway may
• Land and hydrographic surveying select the from the following chartered alternative designations:
• Mapping and positioning
• Global and local navigation systems Chartered Land Surveyor
• Geographic information science
• Engineering survey Chartered Hydrographic Surveyor (candidates pursuing this
• Cadastre and land registration route must take the hydrographic core competency to level 3)
• Private, regional and international boundaries determination
• Dispute resolution and expert witness Chartered Engineering Surveyor (candidates pursuing this route
• Land law, administration and reform must take the engineering surveying core competency to level
• Cartography
6

--- PAGE 6 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Pathway Requirements
Geomatics (including hydrographic) APC
Mandatory
Level 3 • Ethics, rules of conduct & professionalism
Level 2 • Client Care
• Communication and negotiation
• Health and safety
Level 3 • Accounting principles and procedures
• Business planning
• Conflict avoidance, management and dispute resolution procedures
• Data management
• Diversity, inclusion and teamworking
• Inclusive environments
• Sustainability
Core
Level 3 • Cadastre and land administration
• Conflict avoidance, management and dispute resolution procedures
• Engineering surveying
• Geodesy
• GIS
• Hydrographic surveying
• Legal/regulatory compliance
• Measurement
• Remote sensing and photogrammetry
• Surveying and mapping
• Surveying of land and sea
• Use of the marine environment
Level 1 • Measurement
Optional
One to Level 3 and two to • Big data
Level 2, including any not • BIM management
already chosen from the • Construction technology and environmental services
core list • Consultancy services
• Data management
• Development/project briefs
• Environmental assessment
• Ground engineering and subsidence
• Management of the natural environment and landscape
• Planning and development management
• Planning and development management
Plus, one to Level 2from the full list of technical competencies, including any not already chosen from the core or optional lists
To achieve the Chartered Engineering Surveyordesignation candidates must select Engineering surveying to Level 3.
To achieve the Chartered Hydrographic Surveyor designation candidates must select Hydrographic surveying to Level 3.
To achieve the Chartered Land Surveyordesignation candidates must select Surveying and mapping to Level 3.
7

--- PAGE 7 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Competency guidance
The pages that follow are intended to provide guidance for users on the main competencies
associated with geomatics.
The guidance has been drawn up by experienced practitioners and aims to give you a clear and practical
understanding of how to apply the listed core and optional competencies in the context of geomatics. The
guidance does not cover the mandatory competency requirements.
The official competency definitions (at levels one, two and three) are provided, followed by a description of
the key knowledge and activities that are likely to fall within the scope of each competency.
The information provided is designed to be helpful but informal guidance. The knowledge and activities
described under each competency are not exhaustive, and should not be relied upon as any form of
revision list. Candidates must satisfy themselves and their employers that they have reached the required
level of attainment before applying for final assessment.
The competencies are arranged in alphabetical order.
The full list of RICS/SCSI competencies and pathway requirements can be found in the Requirements and
Competencies guide.
Big Data (T099) 9
Building information modelling (BIM) management (T087) 11
Cadastre and land management (T007) 12
Conflict avoidance, management and dispute resolution procedures (M006) 13
Construction technology and environmental services (T013) 15
Consultancy services (T014) 16
Data Management 17
Development/project briefs (T024) 18
Engineering surveying (T027) 19
Environmental assessment (T028) 20
Geodesy (T035) 21
GIS (T036) 22
Ground engineering and subsidence (T037) 24
Hydrographic (marine) surveying (T042) 25
Legal/regulatory compliance (T051) 26
Management of the natural environment and landscape (T055) 27
Measurement (T057) 28
Planning development and management (T061) 29
Remote sensing and photogrammetry (T075) 31
Surveying and mapping (T078) 32
Surveying land and sea (T081) 33
Use of the marine environment (T082) 34
8

--- PAGE 8 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Big data
Description of competency in context of this sector
This competency involves the identification of complex problems as applied to the built and natural environment and the
leveraging of data value.
Candidates will be part of multidisciplinary project teams, including planners, city engineers, surveyors, data architects, data
engineers, and analysts, working with big data. The work is likely to include liaison with policy and operations teams to
understand how big data can be leveraged and combined to add value.
It requires a knowledge of the technical challenges posed by big data, and the specialised IT architectures and techniques
employed for the storage, retrieval and manipulation of big data structures.
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Demonstrate knowledge and Demonstrate an understanding of the Provide evidence of design and
understanding of the principles of big techniques and the tools required for implementation of big data analysis
data processing, the range of available the maintenance of data quality, data using algorithms to handle data sets
sources of big data, data dynamics hygiene and the statistical modelling, in a scientific computing environment
and a critical appreciation of the latest analysis and visual data interrogation for the analysis of big data.
big data research issues. of big data sets.
Examples of activities and Examples of activities and knowledge Examples of activities and knowledge
knowledge comprised within this comprised within this level are: comprised within this level are:
level are: • Ability to source, access, manipulate • Be able to explore and visualise the
• The different phases of software and engineer data processes with data to present the ‘story’ of the data
lifecycle data that typically have in a meaningful way to a range of
• The value of analysis and which characteristics of volume, velocity technical and nontechnical
data sources, analytical techniques and variety audiences
and tools can be used • Can select and use appropriate • Advise on how big data can be used
• How algorithms are designed, statistical methods for sampling, to support strategic and operational
optimised and applied at scale distribution assessment, bias and decision making to create impact
• What data is important to ensure error and add value from its use
business performance • Different data engineering tools for • Advise on the selection, design,
• The importance of presentation and repeatable data processing and can justification, implementation and
applicability of any data that is compare between different data operation of controls and
captured through dashboards or models management strategies to maintain
client portals • Build credible statistical models from the security, confidentiality, integrity,
• Have an appreciation of the the data and use best coding availability, accountability and
possible benefits of Machine practices to generate reproducible relevant compliance of information
learning and Artificial Intelligence work systems with legislation, regulation
and how this can be supported • Problem structuring methods and and relevant standards
through data evaluating when each method is • Driving business change through the
• The various Computer Aided appropriate application of big data analytics
packages that are available in the • Draw on relevant technical and • Advise on the future of big data.
marketplace analytical standards from across
government and industry
continued next page >
continued next page >
9

--- PAGE 9 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Big data
Continued
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 1 (continued) Level 2 (continued)
• The principles of a technical • Expose data from systems (for
security architecture and how these example, through APIs), link data
can be used to reduce information from multiple systems and deliver
risk streaming services
• The principles of Information • Works with other technologists and
Security Governance and the analysts to integrate and separate
purpose of Information Security data feeds to map, produce,
strategies transform and test scalable data
• Legislative and regulatory products that meet client needs
instruments relevant to Information • Applies scientific methods through
• Security relevant to own area of experimental design, exploratory
practice and location data analysis and hypothesis testing
• Beyond RICS/SCSI ethical to reach robust conclusions
standards, candidates should • The ability to data mine and discover
understand and adhere to the trends or sequences that can inform
applicable data science ethics and direct business direction.
framework.
10

--- PAGE 10 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Building Information Modelling
(BIM) management
Reference no. T087
Description of competency in context of this sector
This competency encompasses the establishment and management of the information modelling systems on projects. It covers
collaborative process and technological principles involved in implementing Building Information Modelling (BIM) management.
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Demonstrate knowledge and Develop and apply management Show how the knowledge and
understanding of the technical, systems to facilitate the use of BIM experience gained in this
process and collaborative aspects of on projects including unified control competency has been applied to
the use of BIM on projects. and reporting procedures. advising clients and/or senior
management on BIM strategy.
Examples of knowledge comprised Examples of activities and knowledge Examples of activities and knowledge
within this level are: comprised within this level are: comprised within this level are:
• BIM strategies and implementation • Preparation of a BIM execution plan • Analysing, assessing, evaluating and
• The various technical options and • Designing and implementing a BIM reporting on options for BIM
solutions for information modelling management process strategies at a corporate or project
• The collaborative processes • Analysing comparative BIM solutions level
necessary for BIM adoption • Maintaining an information model • Designing and advising on
• Standard classification systems and • Agreeing and implementing collaborative strategies for the
their use in infrastructure contractual aspects of BIM such as successful implementation of BIM on
• Relevant internationally recognised separate protocol projects
management standards such as • Facilitating and managing project • Advising on the contractual and
Construction Operations Building team members for BIM commercial implications of using BIM
Information Exchange (COBie). implementation. on projects
• Advising on options for software and
protocols on BIM projects
• Advising on technical information
systems requirements for BIM at
corporate or project level.
11

--- PAGE 11 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Cadastre and land management
Reference no. T007
Description of competency in context of this sector
This competency deals with assessing documents relating to the demarcation, registration and transfer of land in order to
define, on the ground, the extent of legal and/or registered title. It involves the preparation of expert lucid reports
for the legal profession and provision of opinions to the legal profession and property owners.
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Demonstrate knowledge and Apply your knowledge of the Provide evidence of reasoned advice,
understanding of field and office principles of land registration, land and fully understand the role and
procedures for boundary and/or management, administration and responsibility of an expert witness,
cadastral surveys appropriate to legislation related to rights in real on the resolution of disputes by
your national and/or international estate internationally and nationally. litigation and alternative procedures.
location. Understand legal and Understand the relationship between
physical boundaries and provide the surveyor, client and legal
examples of these. Understand the profession and preparation of
principles of land management. evidence for the legal process.
Examples of knowledge comprised Examples of activities and knowledge Examples of activities and knowledge
within this level are: comprised within this level are: comprised within this level are:
• An understanding of the property • Adopting appropriate scales for • Advising on the duty of an expert to
registers in use measured surveys to be used in the Court
• An understanding of all plans relating cadastre • Preparing expert reports for use in
to the registration process • Choosing which documentation to litigation
• Limitations of national mapping rely upon • Advising on the requirements of an
• Definition of ‘extent of registered title’ • Practising with complete expert witness within the civil
• An understanding of paper-title independence from the client procedure rules
(the deeds) • Requesting documents from the • Advising on the requirements and
• The status of a deed plan when legal profession role of an expert at a ‘meeting of
referred to in the text of a deed • Obtaining documents from the experts’
• Understanding common law Land Registries • Advising on the role of an expert at a
presumptions regarding property • Using and interpreting of aerial ‘conference with counsel’
boundaries photography and digital imagery • Preparing for trial
• Understanding the law relating to • Reporting relevant matters back to • Advising on the role of an expert
‘moving boundaries’ accretion, the legal profession during and after the Trial
erosion, foreshore. • Understanding of the requirements • An appreciation of alternative dispute
• Global economic and market for Determining Boundaries. resolution options, particularly the
conditions differences and advantages/
• The changing nature of business disadvantages when comparing
• Core business drivers Mediation with Arbitration.
• Clear view of what is meant by a
business’s vision and mission
• Organisational structures, values
and objectives
• Business performance
• Strategic use of real estate
• Decentralised vs centralised
• Organisational objectives.
12

--- PAGE 12 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Conflict avoidance, management
and dispute resolution procedures
Reference no. M006
Description of competency in context of this sector
This covers the recognition, avoidance, management and resolution of disputes, involving an awareness of different dispute
resolution processes and an understanding of the application of dispute resolution procedures appropriate to the area and
jurisdiction of professional practice.
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Demonstrate knowledge and Provide evidence of practical Provide evidence of the application
understanding of the techniques for application in your area of practice of the above in the context of
conflict avoidance, conflict having regard to the relevant law. advising stakeholders in the various
management and dispute resolution circumstances referred to above.
procedures including for example
adjudication and arbitration,
appropriate to your pathway.
Examples of knowledge comprised Examples of activities and knowledge Examples of activities and knowledge
within this level are: comprised within this level are: comprised within this level are:
A basic knowledge and understanding Adopting – or encouraging the adoption • Advising clients of the most suitable
of some of the following, as most of (as appropriate) – suitable dispute means of dispute avoidance on their
appropriate to your market sector/ avoidance techniques projects, and of dispute resolution
areas of specialism: • Negotiating actively on behalf of procedures appropriate to their
• Common causes of disputes clients (e.g. performance failure, individual circumstances,
• The contribution of some of the unavailability, contract variations, demonstrating appreciation of when
following to dispute avoidance: contract interpretations and to seek further specialist advice and
– Risk management (its basic payment) prior to third-party referral when to advise clients within the
principles and techniques) • Assisting in the collation or scope of the insurance cover of the
– Early warning systems preparation of claims/counterclaims candidate’s organisation
– Partnering techniques and submissions • Involvement in, or assistance with, a
– Clear and robust client briefings • Assisting in the identification, referral to a third-party resolution
• Theories of negotiation and the role gathering and collation of facts process and associated
of effective communication and and expert evidence for use in management of that process on
negotiation expert reports behalf of clients.
• The primary features, advantages • Sufficient understanding of the main
and disadvantages of a range of points of the statutory or non- NB: Please note that the roles of
dispute resolution procedures and statutory law relevant acting as a third-party dispute
their surrounding statutory and/or to/underpinning any particular resolver – or expert witness, are –
non-statutory legal/ judicial context dispute resolution process and its for the vast majority of candidates –
(e.g. how forms of contract deal application. not likely to be an activity that is
with dispute resolution, and the undertaken. It is only a small minority
scope of such clauses): of candidates with substantive work
experience for whom this is likely to
be relevant.
continued next page >
13

--- PAGE 13 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Conflict avoidance, management
and dispute resolution procedures
Continued
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 1 (continued)
– Mediation (could include
contracted and project mediation)
and conciliation
– Dispute Resolution Boards (DRBs)
– Dispute Resolution Advisers
(DRAs)
– Adjudication
– Independent expert determination
– Arbitration
– Litigation
• The possible roles of a surveyor as
an expert witness and/or an
advocate, to include an awareness
of the existence and scope of
applicability of RICS/SCSI guidance
for expert witnesses and advocates
• The range of nominating bodies and
services available to resolve
disputes, and particularly the role of
the RICS/SCSI Dispute Resolution
Service and any specialised dispute
resolution schemes it offers relevant
to your market sector
• The RICS/SCSI Global Professional
Statement on Conflict of Interest
and any appropriate national SCSI
guidance.
14

--- PAGE 14 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Construction technology and
environmental services
Reference no. T013
Description of competency in context of this sector
This competency covers the design, engineering surveying and construction of buildings and other structures. Candidates
should have a clear understanding of the design and construction processes commonly used in the industry. They should have
detailed knowledge of construction solutions relevant to their projects. This competency is particularly useful for those on the
chartered engineering surveying route.
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Demonstrate knowledge and Apply your knowledge to the design Advise on the selection and
understanding of the principles of and construction processes. application of particular processes
design and construction relating to within your area of experience.
your chosen field of practice. This should include liaison with
specialists and consultants to
develop project specific design
and construction solutions.
Examples of knowledge comprised Examples of activities and knowledge Examples of activities and knowledge
within this level are: comprised within this level are: comprised within this level are:
• The stages of design from inception • Understanding alternative • Advising on the choice of
to completion construction details in relation to construction solutions for your project
• Impact of current legislation and functional elements of the design • Reporting on the impact of different
regulations (both national and such as different types of piling or design solutions and construction
international) in particular Health structural frame solutions processes on cost and programme.
and Safety regulations • Implement appropriate engineering
• How the various elements of the surveying methods to project
building work and inter-relate • Produce as built drawings/surveys to
• The process of constructing the appropriate and agreed formats,
works scales, accuracies and output
• Ability to adapt engineering • Advise on monitoring, engineering
surveying methods and surveying and survey
instrumentation to particular techniques/methods.
construction processes/methods
• Be aware of calibration and
instrumentation/survey method
limitations.
15

--- PAGE 15 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Consultancy services
Reference no. T014
Description of competency in context of this sector
This competency is about the provision of management consultancy services to a range of different clients from inception to
completion. Consultancy can occur in all areas of geomatics but particularly within the areas of GIS, land management
and cadastre, remote sensing/imagery, geodesy and marine survey. The geomatics emphasis is on a ‘holistic’ approach to
projects and problem solving. This approach calls for a clear, defined and sometimes in-depth understanding of client needs.
Within the context of the actual competency wording, for real estate, read geographic.
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Demonstrate knowledge and Apply your knowledge of the Give reasoned advice, prepare and
understanding of the procurement provision of consultancy services in present consultancy reports,
and execution of advisory and the context of the real estate and together with relevant analysis to
strategic consultancy services in construction sectors. clients, in the context of the real
the context of the real estate and estate and construction sectors.
construction sectors.
Examples of knowledge comprised Examples of activities and knowledge Examples of activities and knowledge
within this level are: comprised within this level are: comprised within this level are:
• The consultancy cycle • Preparing consultancy service plans • Providing reports containing strategic
• Different forms of procurement for • Preparing client briefs advice and recommendations to a
consultancy services • Update reports to clients range of clients
• The range of different consultancy • Negotiating client contracts • Presenting to clients
interventions and approaches. • Dealing with ethical dilemmas • Implementing consultancy
• The types of problems, risks and • Keeping appropriate records. intervention.
issues that may arise during each • Selecting appropriate tools and
phase of the consultancy cycle techniques for a given consultancy
• The importance of agreeing a clear service
contract with clients • Using selected tools and techniques
• The need for the planning, timing to achieve agreed outcomes
and managing of consultancy
interventions
• Managing the use of resources
• Managing client expectations
• Forms of reporting
• Importance of confidentiality when
dealing with sensitive information
• The principal tools and techniques
relevant to consultancy services
• Importance of confidentiality when
dealing with sensitive information.
16

--- PAGE 16 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Data Management
Reference no. T089
Description of competency in context of this sector
This competency covers how data relating to individual projects and a surveyor’s work generally is collected, stored and
retrieved. In addition to having knowledge of the different storage systems and data sources and how they work, a candidate
should also understand the principles behind the systems and what makes them effective. Candidates should also have
knowledge of how general information and data is managed on a project and the increasing use of computerised central
project databases.
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Demonstrate knowledge and Provide evidence of practical Provide evidence of reasoned advice
understanding of the sources of application in your area of practice given to clients and others on the
information, law and data and understand the relevance of use and practical application of the
management methods, and the information gathered and the uses information collected and systems
systems applicable to your area of to which it can be applied. Analyse used, and/or specify the most
practice, including the methodologies the information and data collected. appropriate way for your own and/or
and techniques most appropriate to client organisation to collect, analyse
collect, collate and store data. and apply relevant information and
data.
Examples of knowledge comprised Examples of activities and knowledge Examples of activities and knowledge
within this level are: comprised within this level are: comprised within this level are:
• The use of published sources of • Obtaining data from published • Advising on data storage system
data sources for use on a project • Advising on business filling systems
• How data is collected, analysed and • Obtaining data from in-house sources • Benchmarking from analysed historic
stored within your employer’s • Extracting data for inclusion in a data
organisation database • Advising on the use of a
• How project information is stored • Setting up and using paper based or computerised central project
within your employer’s organisation electronic project filling systems database
• How electronic database systems • Using a computerised central project • Complying with client’s data security
work database requirements.
• The use of computerised central • Inputting and extracting data from
project databases or Building BIM
Information Modelling, the benefits, • Retrieving information from a
challenges and dangers technical library
• How technical libraries are set up • Setting up a technical library.
and used
• Legislation applicable to data
management and data access.
17

--- PAGE 17 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Development/project briefs
Reference no. T024
Description of competency in context of this sector
The purpose of development briefs is to stimulate interest in development sites whilst project briefs influence the form that a
desired development will take. Both provide a framework for developers in the conception of major types of development
schemes. Geomatics professionals can play a major role in the spatial and procedural aspects of development/projects briefs.
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Demonstrate knowledge and Apply your knowledge to identify, Apply information in the preparation
understanding of the information select, assemble and analyse and presentation of development
required to prepare a development information relevant to the briefs or detailed design briefs, or
brief or project brief. preparation of development briefs parts thereof.
or outline project briefs.
Examples of knowledge comprised Examples of activities and knowledge Examples of activities and knowledge
within this level are: comprised within this level are: comprised within this level are:
• The objectives of • Producing a development/project • Using a development/project brief to
development/project briefs brief understanding geospatial design a development scheme
• Essential site details including elements • Negotiating agreements with
history, location, accessibility, • Analysing gathered information and stakeholder interests
services and utilities data for a development/project brief • Planning the implementation of a
• Environmental features and issues • Produce agreed specification and development scheme
• The consultation process decide on survey needs • Formulating financial arrangements
• The planning policy background • Review and highlight any legal for a development scheme.
• Market conditions constraints (ie easements, neighbour
• Be aware of relevant guidance (ie issues)
EIA, 1:500 scale etc) • Advise on boundary issues including
• Review land ownership determined boundaries and as built
documentation and boundary surveys.
definition
• Assess spatial data capture and
output needs
• Assess data needs (ie aerial survey,
national mapping, planning portal,
historical mapping etc).
18

--- PAGE 18 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Engineering surveying
Reference no. T027
Description of competency in context of this sector
Engineering surveying is the art of determining, and/or setting-out the position of features on, above, or below the earth’s
surface to facilitate the design and construction of engineering projects, and buildings.
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Demonstrate knowledge and Apply your knowledge on site and be Plan, specify and give reasoned
understanding of the principles of aware of safety, site management advice on engineering surveys;
construction setting out, procedures and civil engineering/ define and assess accuracies and
deformation and as-built surveys. structural principles. tolerances; manage the engineering
Be fully conversant with all forms of surveying element in large projects;
construction drawings, plans and and understand the principles of
surveys. good engineering practice.
Examples of knowledge comprised Examples of activities and knowledge Examples of activities and knowledge
within this level are: comprised within this level are: comprised within this level are:
• Types of ground markers, • Recognising options, choosing and • Designing and supervising provision,
installation techniques and justifying instrument suitability for use observation, computation and
suitability for use in engineering projects checking of plan and height control
• Requirements for survey data • Understanding accuracies and errors • Advising other construction/design
capture and presentation for design and how they apply professionals on all aspects of site
purposes in your field of operation • Checking the work of others measurement; contributing to project
• Setting-out techniques • Leading the work of teams and management team decision making
• Understand the importance of individuals • Producting project resource plans
comparison of designed and as- • Identifying hazards and undertaking and budgets for programmes of work
built spatial locations risk assessments • Defining survey processes and
• Be conversant with construction • Producing method statements for site assessing accuracy and tolerances of
drawings, plans and surveys survey activities survey systems
• Understand site H & S issues • Communicating and presenting • Managing the engineering survey
• Understand basic principles of civil results of surveys to others. element within a large project
engineering, terminology and • Understanding and analysing the
construction techniques. impact of your decisions on all
aspects of the project
• Implementing project H & S strategy
for site surveying elements of a
project.
19

--- PAGE 19 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Environmental assessment
Reference no. T028
Description of competency in context of this sector
This competency is about an understanding and application of the principles of environmental assessment, particularly
Environmental Impact Assessment and Strategic Environmental Impact Assessment for projects, within the planning
and regulatory framework.
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Demonstrate knowledge and Apply in practice your understanding Provide evidence of reasoned advice
understanding of appropriate of environmental assessment and including the preparation and
environmental assessment the requirements for compliance, production of reports based on
concepts, processes and systems. including undertaking an appropriate environmental
This should include responsibilities environmental assessment. assessments.
imposed by law, codes of practice
and other regulations relating to
environmental assessment.
Examples of knowledge comprised Examples of activities and knowledge Examples of activities and knowledge
within this level are: comprised within this level are: comprised within this level are:
• Principles of Environmental Impact • Advising on the need for • Advising on the need and application
Assessment (EIA) and Strategic environmental assessment, including of EIA, SIA and EA
Environmental Impact Assessment EIA and SIA for development projects • Co-ordinating and providing
(SIA) regulations arising from EC • Advising on requirements and scope specialist advice on these, including
Directives and national/local of EIA and the regulators’ roles negotiations with clients and
legislation • Integrating EIA with topographic regulators
• Understand the data gathering mapping and other data sources to • Preparing and compiling
processes needed for EIAs form a complete client brief. environmental statements and non-
• Demonstrate knowledge of where technical summaries for submission
EA may apply and whether this to clients and regulators, and other
involves formal or informal stakeholders.
environmental assessment
• Understand the basic processes,
procedures and requirements of
formal EIA and SIA.
20

--- PAGE 20 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Geodesy
Reference no. T035
Description of competency in context of this sector
Geodesy is primarily concerned with positioning and the gravity field and geometrical aspects of their temporal variations,
although it can also include the study of the Earth’s magnetic field. Geodesy can be divided in geomensuration, which is
concerned with measuring the earth on a global scale, and surveying, which is concerned with measuring parts of the surface.
Geodesy is a primary skill set of all chartered land and hydrographic surveyors.
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Demonstrate knowledge and Apply your knowledge in practice, Provide evidence of reasoned advice
understanding of the principles of specify and plan surveys and on advanced practice and planning.
geodesy, Global Navigation Satellite instrumentation needs. Be aware of Use advanced software and carry
Systems, global/regional/national error sources and ‘fitness for out adjustments and analysis. Advise
geodetic reference systems, geoids, purpose’ of data. Use industry on client specifications and final
datums and projections. standard software and apply product needs.
network adjustments and/or
transformations.
Examples of knowledge comprised Examples of activities and knowledge Examples of activities and knowledge
within this level are: comprised within this level are: comprised within this level are:
• Understand the difference between • Understanding the various modes of • Understanding differences between
geoid and ellipsoid GNSS (GPS) positioning (static, rapid various obit products, where to
• Being aware of the differences static, kinematic, real-time kinematic obtain and when to apply
between types of projections, with • Understanding the levels of accuracy • Being able to select and apply
their advantages and disadvantages achievable, equipment, data appropriate models/estimation
• An appreciation of the applications collection and processing strategies strategies within commercial GNSS
and limitations of GNSS, with required for a variety of (GPS) processing software eg
particular emphasis on GPS surveying/engineering tasks including: tropospheric estimation
• Be aware of the definition of a topographic survey, setting out, • Being able to advise clients on
datum, and the existence of datums control establishment detailed design, observation and
relevant to the location of the • Planning and executing relevant processing requirements for high
candidate. GNSS (GPS) surveys to appropriate precision or large scale projects
levels of accuracy, including data • Producing and commenting final
processing processing reports and comment
• Using standard commercial GNSS from a strong knowledge base on
(GPS) processing packages and levels of achieved accuracies
appropriate transformation routines to • Supervising and training junior
transform GPS based coordinatesto colleagues in the field use of GPS
National datums. equipment and data processing
techniques.
21

--- PAGE 21 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
GIS (Geographical Information Systems)
Reference no. T036
Description of competency in context of this sector
A GIS uses computer technology to integrate, manipulate and display a wide range of information to create a picture of an area’s
geography, environment and socio-economic characteristics. Beginning with a computerised topographic map as its base, a
GIS overlays and integrates graphic and textual information from separate databases. The end result is a tool that can support
decision making and problem solving and provide almost instantaneous answers to complex questions.
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 1 Level 2
Demonstrate knowledge and Apply your knowledge and assess
understanding of the principles data quality; define and us
of geographic information science appropriate input and data transfer
and systems. Be aware of industry methods; analyse data and prepare
standard GIS, data structures, databases; identify digital data
types and their applications, and of sources and assess ‘fitness for use’.
appropriate capture and output Understand and be aware of national
systems. and international data standards.
Examples of knowledge comprised Examples of activities and knowledge
within this level are: comprised within this level are:
• Understand and be able to explain • Specifying capture methods • Identifying, assessing and sourcing
the generic concepts in GIS appropriate to the data source and datasets appropriate to user
appropriate to different audiences the application, explaining and requirements and assessing their
• Compare and contrast different justifying the rationale used quality and fitness for purpose in the
commercial GIS software packages • Managing data capture projects and context of quantitative and qualitative
and explain their relative merits providing quality control over the measures such as: spatial resolution,
• Proficiently operate at least one acquisition of spatial data for use in accuracy/precision, temporal
commercially available off-the-shelf GIS resolution, purpose of original
GIS software package eg create. • Understanding the principles capture etc
store, access, view, analyse and underlying the analysis of spatial data • Understanding international de jure
plot spatial data and implement these with typical GIS and de facto industry standards and
• Understand and be able to describe algorithms using standard how these apply in local jurisdictions
the data types and data structures functionality and/or a high level and to local customs and practices
used for spatial data and explain programming language • Understanding metadata for third
their relative merits • Applying query languages in relation to party datasets and be able to prepare,
• Understand and be able to explain database management systems eg creating and maintaining appropriate
different open source and data modelling, data loading, data metadata for new datasets.
proprietary data formats and maintenance, query, translate data
explain their relative merits formats, data export.
• Understand and be able to describe Continued over page>
the different methods of primary,
and especially secondary, data
capture and their underpinning
technologies
• Understand and be able to describe
the different output options and
their underpinning technologies.
22

--- PAGE 22 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
GIS (Geographical Information Systems)
Reference no. T036
Continued
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 3
Assess clients’ needs and advise
them accordingly. Define
specifications including data and
process modelling, customise
systems, carry out advanced spatial
analyses, and manage data and
observe data standards.
Examples of activities and • Defining appropriate data
knowledge comprised within this management standards with respect
level are: to; currency requirements, conflict
• Designing and conducting user resolution, archiving, availability,
requirements analysis at backup and recovery, system
consultancy level resilience etc
• Analysing and synthesising user • Explaining all of the above in the
requirements into a coherent and context of the customer’s wider
convincing strategy information systems
• Presenting, explaining and justifying • Identifying and explaining the
findings and advice in a language implications and limitations of advice
appropriate to the customer with respect to any of the above
• Defining data standards to meet • Preparing project proposals and draft
specific user requirements tender documentation for system
• Analysing customer processes and procurement, conducting benchmark
presenting options to model these tests, and overseeing implementation
as appropriate with respect to programmes.
availability of resources, criticality
and customer expectations
• Customising GIS software using a
high level programming language in
order to implement data
specifications, data models,
process models etc
• Analysing, defining and implementing
appropriate analytical methods
23

--- PAGE 23 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Ground engineering and subsidence
Reference no. T037
Description of competency in context of this sector
Understanding of rock and soil mechanics and how these are applied to ground and slope stability problems. Understanding of
natural and mining induced subsidence in terms of causation, effect, mitigation and remedies. Understanding of the methodology
of large scale metrology (LSM), deformation monitoring and advising on appropriate instrumentation and survey methods.
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Undertake appropriate Collate, analyse and interpret Provide evidence of reasoned advice,
investigations including site information gathered after initial prepare and present reports.
inspection to research site history research.
and geology.
Examples of knowledge comprised Examples of activities and knowledge Examples of activities and knowledge
within this level are: comprised within this level are: comprised within this level are:
• An understanding of soil and rock • Designing and implementing (in • Producing a report on slope instability
properties accordance with client brief) a recommending means of minimising
• An understanding of causation of monitoring survey scheme risk
natural and mining induced • Investigating geological and mining • Assisting with the preparation of an
subsidence records to produce a report on expert witness report on ground
• Monitoring ground movement in a causation of ground movement engineering/subsidence
subsidence area using • Examining the options for minimising • Analysing the results of ground
agreed/specified survey the risk of ground movement movement monitoring and producing
instrumentation and methods • Examining the amount of ground a report with conclusions
• Monitoring the effect of ground movement expected and the strains • Evaluating the options for treating
movement on a building/structure induced using appropriate LSM subterranean voids and mine outlets
• Be aware of calibration issues, ISO methods and recommending a course of
documentation and relevant • Being fully aware of calibration issues action.
guidance and client guides. and instrument capabilities
• Producing a full statistical analysis of
tall survey work, advising on
appropriate output formats.
24

--- PAGE 24 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Hydrographic (marine) surveying
Reference no. T042
Description of competency in context of this sector
Hydrographic surveying involves precise positioning and data acquisition in marine environments ranging from inland waters
and rivers, to ports and the deep oceans. This competency involves the ability to provide precise three-dimensional position
and measurement of various physical features within the marine environment such as bottom depth and structure, currents,
tides and waves.
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Demonstrate a working knowledge Plan the conduct of marine surveys. Assess the client’s needs and define
and understanding of the principles Be fully aware of safety issues. specifications, tenders and/or
and limitations of hydrographic Specify appropriate instrumentation contracts. Manage marine surveys.
survey. Conduct measurements in and ensure correct calibration. Analyse the data collected and use it
the marine environment. Understand the principles of geodesy to prepare reports and briefings. Be
on a local and international basis, and conversant with the International
its application in a marine Law of the Sea and/or maritime
environment. Fully understand the boundaries.
principles, application and limitations
of navigation, geophysical and marine
survey instrumentation and software.
Examples of knowledge comprised Examples of activities and knowledge Examples of activities and knowledge
within this level are: comprised within this level are: comprised within this level are:
• Providing navigation and data • Being actively involved in project • Assuming full responsibility for the
collection for oil, gas and mineral initiation and execution as Senior initiation of the works in accordance
resource exploration and extraction Surveyor/Navigator, including with the approved project specific
• Conducting data collection for assessment of survey requirements, and standard survey procedures,
environmental monitoring, equipment specifications and customer requirements and technical
aquaculture and oceanographic suitability specifications
research • Conducting safety risk assessments • Preparing tender documents and
• Providing surveying support for and reviewing project safety plans for being responsible for financial control
dredging, coastal works, near-shore various activities of projects
and/or off-shore construction • Being responsible for, and ensuring • Liaising and advising clients
projects that, equipment is fully calibrated and regarding contract execution and
• Quality control and processing of understanding the importance of having overall responsibility for the
hydrographic data calibration methods and the successful performance of the
• Presenting hydrographic data using relationship to data quality technical team
a range of paper (chart) and • Ensuring geodetic parameters • Evaluating and presenting survey
electronic formats. specified for the project are correctly results and advising clients with
defined and implemented within respect to survey findings
acquisition software. QC all supplied • Assisting clients with their further
positional information. requirements and helping develop
future potential
• Advising clients on national/
international policy and legislation
and its influence on survey activities.
25

--- PAGE 25 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Legal/regulatory compliance
Reference no. T051
Description of competency in context of this sector
Legal issues are at the heart of many areas of traditional land survey practice. All land surveyors should have a good working
knowledge of any legislation which may impact on their work whether it be health and safety legislation in engineering surveying,
land law and/or cadastral regulations or the law of the sea. Although land/engineering/hydrographic surveyors are not asked to
be expert in legal matters, some are and many add expert witness training to their skillsets. For many international members and
prospective members, this competency will be especially applicable in a cadastral context.
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Demonstrate knowledge and Apply your knowledge to comply Provide evidence of reasoned advice,
understanding of any legal/ with legal/regulatory requirements in prepare and present reports on
regulatory compliance requirements specific situations within your area legal/regulatory compliance
in relation to your area of practice. of practice. requirements in relation to your
area of practice.
Examples of knowledge comprised Examples of activities and knowledge Examples of activities and knowledge
within this level are: comprised within this level are: comprised within this level are:
• Be aware of the legislative needs of • Apply your knowledge of land law in • Apply your legal knowledge in a
land and marine survey work an international/national and/or court scenario
• Be aware and understand the regional scenario • Prepare legal reports
basics of land law as applicable in • Apply your legal knowledge in a • Advise on legislative obligations
your geographic location professional scenario such as a minor (Health and Safety etc) to clients
• Be aware of legislative strictures boundary dispute • Advise clients of survey and mapping
such as health and safety legislation • Be aware of all relevant and issues in combination with legal
and/or traffic management for applicable guidance and practice advice in boundary disputes
example notes in this area (such as Expert • Advise on other types of dispute such
• Be aware of tort/contract law and Witness) as party walls, right to light and
its basic principles as applicable in • Be aware of expert witness training subsidence
your geographical area • Apply your knowledge in a cadastral • Advise courts of mapping issues,
• Be aware of national land context. explain complex surveying problems
registration issues/legislation and (map accuracy for example) to legal
cadastral laws. professionals
• Carry out cadastral surveys in
compliance with national/regional
legislation.
26

--- PAGE 26 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Management of the natural
environment and landscape
Reference no. T055
Description of competency in context of this sector
This competency is about the management of landscape and natural resources and habitat.
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Demonstrate knowledge and Apply your knowledge of nature Provide evidence of reasoned advice,
understanding of the importance conservation and landscape in the write reports and negotiate on all
and role of nature conservation and management of real estate and matters relating to nature
the landscape in real estate, development. conservation and landscape.
business management and
development.
Examples of knowledge comprised Examples of activities and knowledge Examples of activities and knowledge
within this level are: comprised within this level are: comprised within this level are:
• Landscape and designations and • Advising on grants available for • Providing strategic advice on land
agri-environmental schemes protection of landscape and natural use, management practice, and
• Relevant legislation governing habitat and natural resources management of specific habitats
designation schemes • Advising on mapping and survey and species
• Bodies charged with bringing in and specifications relating to nature • Interpreting and filtering advice
delivering such legislation conservation and landscape • Providing balanced report writing to
• Understand legislative drivers • Advising on spatial issues which may provide over-arching view of
behind Sites of Special Scientific impact on nature conservation (ie management of a landscape.
Interest (SSSI’s) and other rights of access).
designated areas
• Understand the impact of spatial
data and land law on conservation
and the natural environment.
27

--- PAGE 27 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Measurement
Reference no. T057
Description of competency in context of this sector
This competency is relevant to all data capture and surveying/measurement areas of practice. Particularly, land survey,
engineering survey and measured building survey.
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Demonstrate knowledge and Apply your knowledge to undertake Evaluate, present, manage, analyse
understanding of the principles and measurement. Use basic and/or data and/or apply spatial data and
limitations of measurement relevant advanced instrumentation to collect information. Show an advanced
to your area of practice. data. Present appropriate information understanding of accuracy, precision
gained from measurement. and error sources.
Examples of knowledge comprised Examples of activities and knowledge Examples of activities and knowledge
within this level are: comprised within this level are: comprised within this level are:
• Be aware of all checking • Using advanced data capture • Being fully conversant with all
procedures and be able to ascertain instrumentation such as reflectorless RICS/SCSI geomatics specification
the suitability of different EDM, GPS, handheld GIS data and guidance and other official RICS
instrumentation and measurement capture tools etc /SCSI guidance as appropriate to
techniques • Understanding the principles of your area of practice
• Understand the principles of error measured building surveying and • Appreciating all legislative issues
sources its outputs such as health and safety
• Understand data capture • Understanding the differences • Advising on appropriate data capture
techniques and limitations of use between different data capture techniques
• Understand and use different basic techniques and their fitness for • Explaining complex survey data
survey instrumentation (EDMs, purpose capture techniques and terminology
automatic levels, lasers etc) • Producing final output and utilising to clients
• Understand the principles of data post processing techniques • Describing the principles of meta
representation and the use of • Understanding specifications and data and property data information
appropriate data capture guidance. and compatibility.
techniques to achieve agreed
survey output.
28

--- PAGE 28 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Planning development and
management
Reference no. T061
Description of competency in context of this sector
Planning appraisal is one of the crucial starting points in the development or refurbishment process. Such appraisals draw
together all the relevant policies and site history as pertaining to a site. A planning brief or supplementary planning document
may also be used to stimulate interest in development or provide guidance or mandatory criteria by which a scheme may be
developed. They may be used in conjunction with an allocated site in a development plan or a site being promoted by a land
owner for sale. Both provide a framework and guide for developers in the preparation of development schemes. Development
management covers the process of managing or obtaining the grant of planning consents from the local authority or client-side
perspective. The competency also covers the appeals process and the criteria by which cases will be considered by inspectors.
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Demonstrate knowledge and
understanding site inspection and Apply your knowledge to identify, Apply information and reasoned
evaluation and the information select, assemble and analyse advice in the preparation,
required to prepare a planning, information relevant to the presentation and /or negotiation of
design and/or development brief preparation of briefs. site evaluation reports, planning
and/or to submit a planning application and appeals
application or appeal. documentation, planning and
development briefs or more detailed
design briefs, or parts thereof.
Examples of knowledge comprised Examples of activities and knowledge Examples of activities and knowledge
within this level are: comprised within this level are: comprised within this level are:
• Site/building surveys and details • Producing a planning, design and • Liaising with and negotiating with
e.g. site planning history, flood risk, development brief and/or planning and estates officers, clients,
biodiversity, archaeology, supplementary planning guidance fellow professionals and third-party
architectural character, • Prepare/make presentations at stakeholders in relationship to a
conservation, accessibility, meetings development project
highways, services and utilities • Support the making of planning • Using a brief to assist in the
• Environmental features and issues applications and appeal promotion and/or design and
• Gross and net site development documentation implementation of a development
areas • Selecting, researching and analysing scheme or a site disposal or
• Urban design principles and information and data and writing acquisition
characteristics reports • Preparing planning appraisals of land,
• Basic architectural and urban • Programming or phasing of the buildings and concepts and area
design language in relation to stages of development wide planning parameter studies
planning proposals • Producing a risk analysis • Making a planning application and/or
• The objectives and characteristics • Identify and help ensure compliance submitting an appeal and appearing
of different kinds of brief with planning policies and guidance at an informal or public inquiry
• The stages of the development • Support the preparation of a design
application and appeals process and access statement.
continued next page >
continued next page >
29

--- PAGE 29 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Planning development and
management
Continued
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 1 (continued) Level 3 (continued)
• The consultation process and • Lead the preparation or write a
stakeholder management design and access statement
• The role of supplementary planning • Planning and phasing the
documents, design guides and implementation of a development
codes in guiding planning scheme
applications and their consideration. • Formulating and negotiating a
planning or highways agreements
• Creativity, problem solving and
dispute mediation in scheme
development.
30

--- PAGE 30 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Remote sensing and photogrammetry
Reference no. T075
Description of competency in context of this sector
Remote sensing and photogrammetry are activities and methods within the Geomatics profession related to provision of spatial
information. This involves using photographs and digital imagery to provide information about the Earth’s surface and changes
which occur within the landscape. It also covers the science and technology of making precise measurements on the imagery to
model, in three dimensions, the landscape and features or structures on the Earth’s surface.
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Demonstrate knowledge and Apply your knowledge and be aware Give advice on client requirements.
understanding of the principles of of scales, camera and satellite Identify and assess client
remote sensing and photogrammetry principles and different data capture specifications. Use advanced
both aerial and terrestrial). echniques. Understand and industry software and advise on
undertake procedures for routine data transfer and/or format.
data capture, and analyse and/or
djust/transform data. Use standard
industry software.
Examples of knowledge comprised Examples of activities and knowledge Examples of activities and knowledge
within this level are: comprised within this level are: comprised within this level are:
• Principles of photogrammetry • Interpreting of specifications • Providing reasoned advice on tenders
• Camera geometry – scales, • Setting up equipment – resolving and contracts
precision, ground sample distance interior and exterior orientations • Comparing and advising on benefits
• Properties of photography – • Providing ground control – aerial of alternative methodology
principal point, radial properties triangulation • Project design and drafting of quality
• Principles of remote sensing • Digital Surface Modelling – plans and method statements
• Sensors – geometric characteristics techniques • Project and contract management
• Image processing • 3D data capture. • Producing reports, error detection
• Types of imagery, the source of and analysis.
acquisition, and their practical
application
• Remote sensed data – infra-red,
panchromatic, colour, thermal
• Stereo photography and the
requirements to achieve 3D
measurement
• Oblique photography
• Ortho-photography (true,
ortho-rectified, Geo-rectified).
31

--- PAGE 31 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Surveying and mapping
Reference no. T078
Description of competency in context of this sector
Mapping, in this context, is an exceptionally broad potential area of practice. Encompassing everything from LIDAR, IFSAR,
aerial photography and other primary data capture techniques to ground control using GPS and/or traditional techniques and
the production of digital elevation models, DTMs or any form of geographical output including GIS data capture and output.
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Demonstrate knowledge and Apply your knowledge of mapping Provide evidence of reasoned advice
understanding of the principles of and geographical sciences in on the design and specification of
mapping and geographic information relation to your area of practice, mapping and/or geo-information
sciences appropriate to your area of including data capture error projects in a national and/or
practice, including the accuracy, sources, instrument calibration and international context.
scale, currency and fitness for limitations. Use mapping/
purpose of hardcopy and/or digital cartographic survey software,
maps, drawings, imagery and plans. understand production processes
and digital data capture (scanning
and/or digitisation), and carry out
surveys through to the end product.
Examples of knowledge comprised Examples of activities and knowledge Examples of activities and knowledge
within this level are: comprised within this level are: comprised within this level are:
• The limitations of use of spatial data • Using post processing survey/ • Using all forms of survey/mapping/
capture instrumentation and mapping software competently imagery contracts competently and
techniques • Using survey industry standard software describing the nuances of each (i.e.
• Instrument checking techniques and post processing techniques accuracy/ fitness for purpose issues)
• The basic principles of geodesy and • Understanding the principles of data • Being fully conversant with all RICS
its application to mapping per your integration and compatibility, Geomatics specifications and
area of practice integrating different data sets to guidance in relation to mapping
• Basic survey software achieve client needs • Explaining complex mapping issues
• Data quality and checking criteria • Understanding scalability in the context to clients and discerning their ‘actual’
and techniques of both mapping and user requirements needs.
• The issues around visual • Using imagery software and GIS data
representation of spatial data and its capture tools
relationship with data capture • Using modern survey instrumentation
techniques and understanding checking/calibration
• Understand scalability, fitness for techniques
purpose and accuracy constraints. • A good understanding of error sources,
probability and statistical analysis
according to your area of practice
• Being fully conversant with the
production of digital terrain models,
digital elevation modelling and data
integration techniques (overlaying OS
map layers with surveyed
topographical data for example)
• Understanding survey contracts and
specifications (in conjunction with
senior colleagues).
32

--- PAGE 32 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Surveying land and sea
Reference no. T081
Description of competency in context of this sector
This competence covers aspects of both terrestrial and marine surveying. It involves the collection, processing, analysis and
dissemination of geospatial data.
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Demonstrate knowledge and Apply your knowledge by identifying, Define and assess client needs.
understanding of the principles of planning and accessing survey Define specifications and prepare
geomatics and the various requirements, specifications and tenders and/or contracts.
applications of its techniques within appropriate instrumentation. Use Demonstrate that you are fully
the natural, maritime and built industry standard survey and/or conversant with the principles of
environments. offshore software, and demonstrate geodesy on a national, international
an understanding of the principles, and/or maritime basis.
uses and limitations of Global
Navigation Satellite Systems and
other navigation systems.
Examples of knowledge comprised Examples of activities and knowledge Examples of activities and knowledge
within this level are: comprised within this level are: comprised within this level are:
• Conducting marine navigation and • Being responsible for and ensuring • Assuming full responsibility for the
offshore data collection for that survey equipment is fully initiation of a survey in accordance
exploration and exploitation calibrated, and understanding the with the approved project specific
purposes importance of calibration methods and standard survey procedures,
• Collecting and quality controlling and the relationship to data quality customer requirements and technical
spatial data for control networks • Undertaking post-process GNSS specifications
and/or topographic detail surveys observations and performing • Sourcing, managing and assessing
• Conducting engineering surveys to adjustments within a network survey contractors performing work
provide dimensional control, setting • Performing datum transformations on your behalf
out and QA checks for the and understanding the relationship • Helping to create the overall direction,
construction industry between local datum and global strategy, and coordination for the
• Collecting and/or manipulating data datums such as WGS84 business development and marketing
for a specific use within a • Being involved in project initiation of a GIS product and service
Geographic Information System and execution as Senior Surveyor • Advising clients upon coastal
• Conducting Photogrammetric including assessment of survey processes and the potential impact of
measurements (2D or 3D) from requirements, equipment any activity and/or construction in the
photographs or imagery stored specifications and suitability nearshore environment.
electronically. • Working directly with program • Advising clients on national/
managers, software development international policy and legislation
engineers, and testers to write and its influence on survey activities.
documentation that helps customers
understand and use a GIS system.
33

--- PAGE 33 ---
Your pathway guide to
Geomatics Surveying
Use of the marine environment
Reference no. T082
Description of competency in context of this sector
This competency covers the wide range of sea area usage; application of national and international legislation; conducting data
acquisition and analysis. It also involves presentation professional and scientific reports, assisting in sea area evaluation and the
preparation of planning applications. Additionally it incorporates assistance provided to clients in respect of marine exploitation,
with due regard to the environment.
Examples of likely knowledge, skills and experience at each level
Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Demonstrate an understanding of Apply these principles to planning for Oversee the conduct of operations to
the principles of inshore and offshore the exploitation and/or use of marine use and/or exploit marine resources.
resource development, exploitation resources. Use appropriate marine Analyse the data collected and
and/or conservation. Be aware of the data capture and analysis software prepare reports and briefings on the
relevant legal guidance and and/or instrumentation. data collected. Advise on national
environmental issues. and international policy on ocean
and inshore resource management.
Examples of knowledge comprised Examples of activities and knowledge Examples of activities and knowledge
within this level are: comprised within this level are: comprised within this level are:
• Be aware of the global distribution • Determining appropriate assessment • Liaising with and advising clients on
of physical, biological and chemical techniques for sea area valuation project planning
resources within the sea, upon and • Planning and executing a marine • Conducting project management
beneath the seabed that may be of survey in order to determine both pre, post and during
value to humankind economic yield, seabed topography, development projects
• Understand ethics and ecology and/or geophysical structure • Evaluating and presenting survey
international/national legislation • Undertaking water quality and results with respect to planned sea
affecting sea areas movement observations and analysis area usage within scientific reports
• Understand the role of economic • Appreciating the application and • Advising clients in lay terms on
markets, property rights and market limitations of different data project findings
structures acquisition equipment • Assisting clients in the development
• Appreciate the range of sea area • Displaying acquired data within a of their future plans
utilisation and the concept of range of paper and electronic media • Applying national and international
conflict management formats. policy to future developments.
• Appreciate the concepts of
sustainable development.
34

--- PAGE 34 ---
Dating back to 1895, the Society of Chartered Surveyors www.scsi.ie
www.scsi.ie
Ireland is the independent professional body for Chartered
Surveyors working and practicing in Ireland.
Working in partnership with RICS, the pre-eminent Chartered Society of
professional body for the construction, landandpropertysectors Chartered Surveyors Ireland
around the world, the Society and RICS act in the public interest: 38 Merrion Square
setting and maintaining the highest standards of competence Dublin 2
and integrityamong the profession; and providing impartial, education@scsi.ie
authoritativeadvice on key issues for business, society and T 01 6445500
governments worldwide. F 01 6611797
Advancing standardsin construction, land and property, the
Chartered Surveyor professional qualification is the world’s leading
qualificationwhen it comes to professional standards. In a world
where more and more people, governments, banks and commercial
organisations demand greater certainty of professional standards and
ethics, attaining the Chartered Surveyor qualification is the recognised
mark of property professionalism.
Members of the profession are typically employed in the construction,
land and property markets through private practice, in central and
local government, in state agencies, in academic institutions, in
business organisations and in non-governmental organisations.
Members’services are diverse and can include offering strategic
advice on the economics, valuation, law, technology, finance and
management in all aspects of the construction, land and property
industry.
All aspects of the profession, from educationthrough to
qualificationand the continuing maintenance of the highest
professional standardsare regulatedand overseen through the
partnership of the Society of Chartered Surveyors Ireland and RICS, in
the public interest.
This valuable partnership with RICS enables access to a worldwide
network of research, experienceand advice.